i thought for this video we would talk
about something called the great
attractor which uh you may have heard of
and may want to learn a little bit more
about
but first we're going to start off
more locally and have a little look at
where we are in space
and by locally i mean our local group of
galaxies that consists of the milky way
the andromeda galaxy and the smaller
triangulum galaxy messier object number
33 there
um
the
distance between the milky way and the
andromeda galaxy is about two and a half
million light years which is about 20
times
the size of the milky way in terms of
diameter so there's about a 20 to one
sort of ratio between the size of the
galaxies and the space between them
and the triangulum galaxy is just a
little further away three million light
years
but as i said it's a lot smaller
each of the other two are about 400
billion stars give or take maybe the
andromeda galaxy might have as many as
one trillion stars in here to be a
little bit larger than the milky way
we're not entirely sure
but the triangulum galaxy is only about
of the size of the milky way at
40 billion stars still a lot but it's
much smaller and as we've illustrated
here in the picture there are a number
of other dwarf galaxies
like the large and small magellanic
clouds that can be seen from the
southern hemisphere that are orbiting
around the milky way and andromeda has
its own companions as well
so this group spans around three million
light years
and
andromeda is coming towards the milky
way or vice versa depending on your
point of view of course because speed is
always relative to some fixed point
so the two are approaching each other in
fact pulled towards each other by their
mutual gravitational attraction and
eventually will merge and presumably the
other smaller galaxy will merge with
them as well at some point
now that local group sits within the
universe at large
and is surrounded by a number of other
groups
it's about 11 million light years away
we have the
group containing
bodes galaxy messier 81 and the cigar
galaxy messier 82 and some others
and then our next nearest neighboring
group and you can go further out to the
pinwheel galaxy at 24 million light
years away the whirlpool galaxy at 31
and then we're over to the draco group
here and
the leo 1 m66 group
in the opposite direction
and the ursa major group and the virgo
cluster which is very famous
and that of those the virgo cluster is
the largest and most massive
so that sort of gives you some idea of
uh
the the surroundings
in which the local group sits
um
but in fact we now know of vastly more
of this structure and this picture here
is quite incredible
we can see the milky way galaxy viewed
from our point of view and its nucleus
in the middle here and we can see out to
many of these other clusters much
further away
all indicated
in this amazing map you can begin to see
some of the things i'm going to be
talking about here's the virgo cluster
over here and we have things like these
long filamentary structures which seem
to appear in the uh distribution of
galaxies
okay
now the first indication of something
interesting going on
in the universe at large was that
the
milky way galaxy
and its neighbors were measured as
regards their relative velocities of
course they're all relative to us
because that's where we are and shown on
this diagram there are other galaxies
with their uh movement in space shown as
three uh different orthogonal axes red
green and blue at right angles to each
other showing the directions that
they're moving through space
and this is called their peculiar
velocities there's nothing strange about
these velocities they're not peculiar in
that sense they're just different to
what you would expect from the general
expansion of the universe which
carries everything apart on the ground
scale but if you subtract that grand
scale expansion out you get these
residual peculiar velocities
and
when these were analyzed it was noticed
and i think you can perceive it just
about on this uh chart that a lot of the
uh
arrows are actually pointing um in
similar directions have a look at all
these green ones here they're all
pointing up in this direction so so are
most of these
all generally up and off this the chart
here there are a couple coming the other
way but
more often than not they're pointing
upwards
and so by sort of averaging out the uh
motion of all of the galaxies in and
around this area
we could see that the whole
local group really was moving in towards
the constellation of centuries in the
southern sky
with a velocity of 600 kilometers per
second that's uh
over five times the velocity that the
milky way and andromeda are approaching
each other just to put it into context
so it's really it's quite a high speed
and the reason for that
was
not really understood to begin with and
indeed when you have just one piece of
data like this it's often difficult to
be sure whether you believe it or not
now you're probably familiar with this
picture of the cosmic microwave
background radiation that comes from the
heat left over from the
big bang then and this is a map of the
tiny temperature fluctuations
in this microwave radiation that's seen
all over the sky and in fact the
difference between the hottest parts in
red and the coldest parts in blue is
tiny it's only one part in one hundred
thousand
it takes a very delicate uh degree of
mathematics in fact to separate this map
out
from the raw readings i'll just
illustrate that
when you measure the microwave
background to begin with what you see is
an almost uniform map like this all
colored in the same
and the temperature is as it says here
2.72 degrees above absolute zero and it
looks to be flat all over the sky
but if you
then look very carefully at the
differences
in one part of the sky to another
compared to this
uh you find that actually it looks more
like there is a hotter part of the sky
in one direction or a colder part of the
sky in another direction opposite their
so-called dipole across the sky
and then if you look even more uh
carefully you find the imprint across
the middle of our milky way galaxy and
that has to be subtracted out by uh
careful mathematical analysis of our
galaxy to pull out the real detail
so it's quite an achievement to pull out
the the subtle detail in it all
now for our point of view what's
interesting is actually this middle
chart let's look at a cleaned up version
of it which is really just telling us
that the
uh
cosmic microwaves are showing
a
a dipole across the sky a hot and a cold
direction
and that's caused by
a doppler shift
due to the movement of our local group
of galaxies the milky way and its
friends
are moving
relative to the original background
radiations
uh frame of reference and so you're
getting the
uh region that we're moving towards
looks hotter and the reason that we're
moving away from looks colder as the
wavelengths are squished in the
direction of movement and stretched as
we recede from it
now
this actually agreed to a large extent
with the
data for the
peculiar velocities and so people began
to believe that maybe there was
something definitely in it because we
have two independent lines of reasoning
and it was suggested that perhaps there
was some very large concentration of
mass
in that direction
pulling us and all our neighbors
in this particular
direction in space and of course it was
given the name the great attractor as it
was very massive and we were all heading
towards it under
gravity now unfortunately that direction
the location for the uh great attractor
is a little bit of an awkward place
in 1986 it was eventually tracked down
to being at a distance of somewhere
between 150 and 250
million light years away so 10 times the
distance to the andromeda galaxy
um
and in the direction in the southern sky
of the the constellations triangular
australis and norma down there in the
southern sky and this is a hubble space
telescope image of that area of the sky
there's a a number of nearby stars with
the diffraction spikes on them those are
all in the milky way there's one or two
uh galaxies that show up particularly
this one here that are relatively nearby
but the greater tractor is out there in
the background somewhere
not really seen in this picture
now what makes it particularly difficult
is that the direction we're talking
about
is very much in the direction of the
center part of the milky way galaxy in
our skies
so we're looking through
all of this gas and dust that's very
dense in the middle of the galaxy this
is called the zone of avoidance because
optical astronomers avoid it when trying
to see out into deep space because you
basically can't all you're seeing is the
closely packed stars and the lit up gas
and dust of the bulge of the center of
our galaxy
but radio astronomers and x-ray
astronomers using orbital x-ray
satellites are able to see through this
because those wavelengths are not
absorbed by the gas and dust and so they
can get a bit of an image through it and
looking in that zone of avoidance they
discovered a large collection of uh mass
out there in the form of the normal
cluster of galaxies and about the right
distance 222 million light years and it
contained um 10 to the power 15 solar
masses that's one with 15 zeros after it
in terms of uh solar masses how does
that compare with say the uh andromeda
galaxy well the andromeda galaxy is uh
10 to the power 12 solar masses so this
is a thousand times the mass of the
andromeda galaxy and agreed roughly with
the estimate of the mass that the great
attractor might have
and so it was initially thought maybe
the normal cluster was uh the um
greater attractor itself
you can see an image here that's been
made up of that area in in the sky by
piecing together observations at
different wavelengths and here's a radio
map of the the uh
cluster is particularly bright bits in
the middle here on the optical or the uh
more
normal looking picture
however further analysis in the 90s
revealed that the great attractor
perhaps wasn't as massive as uh
we thought and that we were suffering
from a degree of observational selection
often called malmquist bias where you
tend to
note brighter objects much more easily
in your survey than dim ones and as a
result they tend to skew the answers
this
plagues the whole of astronomy where
for example we found pluto um as being
one of the brightest objects in the
kuiper belt and thought it was alone for
a long time
but of course it's not and we tended to
find bigger and brighter
planets around other stars for the same
reason
and again in 2005 another x-ray survey
agreed with this and that the mass of
the great attractor was only about
actually one-tenth of the mass that
we had originally assigned to it
now that's a problem because it wouldn't
give the velocity of movement of the
local group
that we'd measured it that no longer
adds up
but
it was then discovered that lurking
behind in the same rough direction
as the position of the great attractor
there is another large group of galaxies
called the shapley supercluster
and there's an image here again in false
colour of the shapley supercluster and
then an optical image here of the uh
this central part you can see they're
the same shape
and
it's the combined pull of the shapley
attractor
and the great attractor which is nearer
to us
that you need to
add up in order to get the
uh movement of the milky way or at least
most of it it was much closer it was
about 90 percent correct by the time the
shapley attractor had been added in and
the shaping attractor is more massive uh
by a considerable amount than the great
attractor but further away and so uh
contributes uh
by uh
the sort of inverse square law you have
to add things up
according to newton's formula
and the final piece of this little
puzzle was then the discovery of the
velar supercluster also roughly in the
same direction of the uh
great attractor and
this
is a very large structure 300 million
light years across containing another
thousand galaxies worth of mass
but 870 million light years away and you
can see it's in two parts in fact here
and here on this uh rather rough image
out in the southern sky here's the large
magellanic cloud getting in the way and
you can see here is part of the milky
way spanning across in front of it so
it's very difficult to eliminate that
but the yellow is the distant background
image
and
these large groupings here were enough
to add the rest of the mass into the
picture so that the velocity that we
observe for our movement in that
direction
pretty much adds up now
and all of this effort of mapping all of
these superclusters and galaxies out
into the distant universe around us has
given us a very nice image of
the
uh
super super cluster of which all of this
forms and we call this
laniakea
the red dot is us here and all of these
other dots are
groups of galaxies so
we are heading
and being pulled
strongly towards this great
concentration of galaxies here this is
being pulled in this direction to
another knot
and then the great attractor is centered
over here
we can see that in the next image
and it is largely along these filaments
that the
galaxies are all moving down towards the
uh central pit of this area in the terms
of the gravitational pit where the
greater tractor lives
um
overall laniakea is
about 500 million
light years across
and
contains a hundred thousand galaxies
in 500 galaxy clusters as a rough
estimate and has these four main um
regions uh one two three and then one
just off the top of the picture there
which is actually the shapley cluster i
think i've got a picture of that coming
up
and it may appear that we're all going
to move in and merge into the great
attractor
but probably not because the expansion
of the universe is opposing some of this
flow and as the effect of dark energy
builds which it seems to
be accelerating that expansion it's
likely that that will take over and
unbind the system because there's not
enough gravity overall to to overcome
and pull everything together before dark
energy will disperse it so we may
approach the great attractor in the
future but then recede away from it as
dark energy carries the expansion faster
and faster
here's the wider picture which shows the
shapley concentration out here beyond
the edge really of the laniakea
supercluster and that this is again
where we are and the lonic
laniakea structure is surrounded by the
shapley super concentration the coma
concentration here and the perseus
pisces concentration here so it is being
pulled in three different directions but
the most massive and uh most strongly
affecting us is the shapley
concentration over here
and they all sit on these
cosmic filaments that uh seem to perform
a web going across the uh the universe
for example here is an image of galaxy
concentrations off in one quadrant and
we can see the great wall here in green
and in two parts and then further out
the shapley wall which is even thicker
and in between these great filamentary
structures are these huge voids that
contain almost nothing and this is a
process by which the gravity uh
collapses a random distribution of
galaxies are scattered around
with all their own peculiar velocities
you will find that there's one direction
that has slightly stronger pull
by sheer chance than the others
just because of the random distribution
of masses and velocities
and so one direction begins to collapse
faster than the other two
and in fact all three dimensions of a
structure will collapse at different
rates and so what would be a
three-dimensional
random distribution will collapse down
into sheets with voids between and then
from sheets into filaments as time goes
on and then lastly the filaments
themselves
collapse along their own length as the
galaxies move in
because the more concentrated something
gets the uh faster the the collapse
towards it becomes and so whichever is
the
uh most concentrated dimension by chance
ends up collapsing the quickest
i just thought i'd show you another
picture showing where the great wall is
and we've got this great long structure
here
and
you can see some of these huge voids in
between the filaments on this diagram
the scale here is 100 million light
years so you can see even in in this
patch of space we have these huge voids
and then this web-like structure of uh
almost a sort of foam of
bubbles with holes in between and the
galaxies where the bubble material would
be if you imagine blowing a whole series
of bubbles as i say it's all down to the
gravitational collapse
there's an even wider picture of that
same idea of the the filamentary web of
the uh
universe and what you have is that the
uh the knots where the filaments cross
and join this is where the real
mega clusters the giant super clusters
begin to build themselves as everything
moves in and becomes more dense then
there's more gravity and so things move
in even faster and the voids the
opposite happens there is nothing
pulling anything into the void so
everything that remains in them falls
out of the void uh even quicker so the
voids become more void like and the
knots become denser
now
if we go back to the cosmic microwave
background radiation this is a plot of
it again across the whole sky and we
looked at the motion
of
the doppler shift of uh
different parts of this and the region
indicated in purple here
was a region that is found where a lot
of things were moving towards this
region even after we've subtracted out
all of the other factors
now i did say that's a very complicated
and detailed mathematical uh process but
there was this rather strange residual
motion all pointing to this area here
and if we zoom in on it with the hubble
space telescope it looks like this
um
so
what we find is that um we can color in
the regions in different colors here
showing the excess motion
for clusters
of different uh
natures
and they're all lining up in a rather
suspicious manner and this suggests
everything is being pulled even these
huge clusters are being pulled
towards one region of the sky
but strangely we can't detect anything
in that region that is responsible
there's no great super attractor that we
can see here at all
again again blow that up we can see uh
the blue is
clusters in this uh 0.8 to 1.2 billion
light years and then the further away we
go
the clusters are moving
in slightly different uh
orientations but basically overlapping
all the same region here
now
to understand this
what we think is going on is based on
the fact that we can actually only see
a certain part of the universe at any
given time
you can look out in the universe when
you look out further and further
the light travel time
from the object you're
gazing at
increases with the distance so the
further away it is the longer the light
has been traveling to get to you since
it set off
and of course there's an upper limit to
that which is the age of the universe at
13.8
billion
years so if the light travel time
is 13.8 billion years then
you're looking right back in time to the
big bang and so you see the cosmic
microwave background radiation and
nothing behind it because you can't see
through that nearer by you see the
younger universe and the
more nearby you're looking the younger
the piece of universe that you see
because the light travel time is
correspondingly shorter
but this means that
your
view of the universe is limited by this
cosmic horizon
caused by this light travel time they
may well be
objects that are
out there more distant than the light
travel time permits you to be able to
see
yet
that may be that they will
as the universe gets older the light
travel time would increase and you would
be able to see further and therefore be
able to see objects hove into view
that previously were too far away for
their light to have arrived at you yet
and that's a perfectly
solid argument except of course the
universe is also expanding and so
actually the
distance between
uh the objects and therefore the light
travel time to these very distant
objects is increasing as well
and so
actually it turns out that the
expansion of the universe is going to
win that argument and things that are
out of your
cosmic horizon will be carried away from
you
faster than the horizon itself expands
with time and so you will never be able
to see them
but that doesn't mean you can't tell
that they're there
because
whilst they can't have any direct
influence on you
no light can reach you no gravitational
effect can reach you because gravity
also travels at the speed of light so
they can't influence you at all
but they can influence
some of the
material that you can see
or putting it strictly they can have
influenced it in the past
they can have set other galaxies moving
towards them by gravitational attraction
and we might be able to see those uh
intervening galaxies
with a peculiar motion pointing towards
an object that's outside of our horizon
and this picture kind of illustrates
that with a sort of topographic map of
the strength of gravity
um here is the
we are inside our own
circle in two dimensions it's a sphere
really but circle
of
visibility this is the dotted line is
the cosmic horizon beyond which we
cannot see because of the light travel
time but just outside it there may be a
huge concentration of mass over here
just by sheer chance and so a lot of the
galaxies in between us and this uh
concentration of mass
are being attracted towards it it's kind
of downhill in this direction um for
them and they the uh they're moving in
that direction pulled by the gravity of
this un unseen and unseeable large mess
and that is what we think we've detected
in the cosmic microwave background and
it's called dark flow
now not everybody is convinced by this
and the the
scientists are still discriminating
whether or not this is a real effect but
it's certainly entirely plausible that
it could be the case that the motion of
objects that we see
is being influenced by even more dense
regions than
our own local patch and it could be that
our local patch is somewhat untypical of
the rest of the universe but
unfortunately it's going to be really
difficult to
find out we're going to have to use
these very indirect methods to try to
infer what the density of surrounding
material is in different directions
so
with that i think that sort of all right
ties up the story of the great attractor
and the motion of the earth and the
milky way galaxy under the influence of
all of these amazing
large scale structures in the universe
and so with that i'll bring this one to
an end